# Project-4 Write Up

The focus of our project at OrangeFin was to provide and display meaningful trends in the California housing market over the last decade with a specific focus on how the Covid 19 global pandemic influenced housing prices. In addition to displaying recent trends, we worked towards creating a machine learning model that provides predictions of future housing prices based on factors such as the year it was released on the market, the month, the county with which the property was listed in, the type of property, and the number of days it was on the market before being sold. 

One of OrangeFin's top priorities was to not only find meaningful trends for consumers to understand about the California housing market but also to display them in a professional and easily understandable manner. Utilizing Tableau's storyboard feature, our group was able to display high level broader data such as the average sales price for properties over the last decade and the total homes sold by year which can both be sorted by property type. We found that, over all properties, San Fracisco County has the most expensive properties and has the highest sales price in each individual property type other than the townhouses and single family properties. On the other hand, Los Angeles County comfortably has the most homes sold over the last decade regardless of property type. Using this information, we compared the median price per square foot by property type in Los Angeles County with San Francisco County using two bar graphs to observe the data simultaneously. 

After taking a broad look at the housing data by county over the last decade, we took a deeper look at the effect of Covid on the housing market. Each graph has a legend that that allows the user to view any visualizataion by property type. As shown on the Tableau storyboard titled Covid Comparisons, the "Pre-Covid" category was defined as 2018-2019 and the "Post-Covid" category was defined as 2020-2021. The main takeaway from the "Sales Price Comparison Pre-COVID vs Post-COVID" sheet is that every county's prices increased other than minimal decreases in Calaveras County (which had a 700 acre fire in 2021). The next sheet named List Price Sale Price Trends 2015-2022" illustrates that the list and sales trends were not only higher than before 2018 but also had a greater slope meaning that housing prices were being listed and sold were getting larger at a faster rate during the post-covid era. When looking at the set of pie charts in the next sheet, though this begins to make sense. The main takeaway from the "Property and Inventory 2018-2019 vs 2020-2021" is that more properties are being sold despite their being less inventory on the market. This lack of supply with a greater demand that could be caused by the increased desire to have private spaces because of the nature of the pandemic or overall panic about the pandemic perfectly explains the extremely high prices in the post-covid era. 



On our Leaflet Map page, housing properties in each county are displayed throughout a map of California and divided by property according to the legend in the bottom right corner and the hamburger dropdown menu. When hovering over any property, there is also information about the average median sales price of that county in 2021 and the year over year percentage change in the average median sales price. Most counties have positive YoY values meaning that there were price increases in most counties from 2020 to 2021 which was already confirmed through the Tableau storyboard's. 

Lastly, OrangeFin created its own machine learning predictor to predict future housing prices based on year, month, county, property type, and number of days on the market. The data used for our project included averaged values for each county instead of prices for individual properties which greatly decreased the performance of our random forest model upon initial attempts. In order to makeup for the lack of quality data, we rounded all of the sales prices to the nearest hundred thousand for better labeling which drastically increased the accuracy of our model to around 66%. Our model predicted many decreases in housing prices over time which seems to go against the trends that had been observed thoroughly in Tableau. Once again, this could be due to the imperfections ofthe random forest model. However, with the fact that almost 650,000 people have left California in 2020 alone it is possible that prices may drop ors tabilize as the demand for housing decreases closer to the level of the supply. 


